#  401 Finding fossil man

We can read of things that happened 5,000 years ago in the Near East, where
people first learned to write. But there are some parts of the world where even
now people can not write.  The only way that they can preserve their history is
to recount it as sagas - legends handed down from one generation of storytellers
to another. These legends are useful because they can tell us something about
migrations of people who lived long ago, but none could write down what they
did. Anthropologists wondered where the remote ancestors of the Polynesian
peoples now live in the Pacific Islands came from. The sagas of these people
explain that some of them came from Indonesia about 2,000 years ago.

But the first people who were like ourselves lived so long ago that even their
sagas, if they had any, are forgotten. So archaeologists have neither history
nor legends to help them to find out where the first 'modern man' came from.

Fortunately, however, ancient man made tools of stone, especially in flint,
because this is easier to shape than other kinds. They may also have used wood
and skins, but these have rotted away. Stone does not decay, and so the tools of
long ago have remained when even the bones of the man who made them have
disappeared without trace.

#  402 Spare that spider

Why, you may wonder, should spiders be our friends? Because they destroy so many
insects, and insects include some the greatest enemies of human race. Insects
would make it impossible for us to live in the world, they would devour all our
crops and kill our flocks and herds, if it were not for the protection we get
from insect-eating animals. We owe a lot to the birds and beasts who eat insects
but all of them put together kill only a fraction of the number destroyed by
spiders. Moreover, unlike some of the other insect eaters, spiders never do the
least harm to us or our belongings.

Spiders are not insects, as many people think, nor even nearly related to them.
One can tell the difference almost at a glance, for a spider always has eight
legs and an insect never more than six.

How many spiders are engaged in this work on our behalf? One authority on
spiders made a census of the spiders in a grass field in the south of England,
and he estimated that there were more than 2,250,000 in one acre; that is
something like 6,000,000 spiders of different kinds on a football pitch. Spiders
are busy for at least half the year in killing insects. It is impossible to make
more than the wildest guess at how many they kill, but they are hungry
creatures, not content with only three meals a day. It has been estimated that the
weight of all the insects destroyed by spiders in Britain in one year would be
greater than the total weight of all the human beings in the country.


#  403 Matterhorn man

Modern alpinists try to climb mountains by a route which will give them good
sport, and the more difficult it is, the more highly it is regarded. In the
pioneering days, however, this was not the case at all. The early climbers were
looking for the easiest way to the top, because the summit was the price they
sought, especially if it had never been attained before. It is true that during
their explorations they often faced difficulties and dangers of the most
perilous nature, equipped in a manner which would made a modern climber shudder
at the thought, but they did not go out of their way to court such excitement.
They had a simple aim, a solitary goal -- the top!

It is hard for us to realize nowadays how difficult it was for the pioneers.
Except for one or two places such as Zermatt and Chamonix, which had rapidly
become popular, Alpine villages tended to be impoverished settlements cut off
from civilization by the high mountain. Such inns as there were were generally
dirty and flea-ridden; the food simply local cheese accompanied by bread often
twelve months old, all washed down with coarse wine. Often a valley boasted no
inn at all, and climbers found shelter wherever they could -- sometimes with the
local priest ( who was usually as poor as his parishioners ), sometimes with
shepherds or cheese makers. Invariably the background was the same: dirt and
poverty, and very uncomfortable. For men accustomed to eating seven-course
dinners and sleeping between fine linen sheets at home, the change to the Alps
must have been very hard indeed.


#  404 Seeing hands

Several cases have been reported in Russia recently of people who can read and
detect colours with their fingers, and even see through solid doors and walls.
One case concerns an eleven-year-old schoolgirl, Vera Petrova, who has normal
vision but who can also perceive things with different parts of her skin, and
through solid walls. This ability was first noticed by her father. One day she
came into his office and happened to put her hands on the door of a locked safe.
Suddenly she asked her father why he kept so many old newspapers locked away
there, and even described the way they were done up in bundles.

Vera's curious talent was brought to the notice of a scientific research
institute in the town of Ulyanovsk, near where she lives, and in April she
was given a series of tests by the special commission of the Ministry of Health of
the Russian Federal Republic. During these tests, she was able to read a
newspaper through an opaque screen and, stranger still, by moving her elbow
over a child's game of Lotto she was able to describe the figures and colours
printed on it; and, in another instance, wearing stockings and slippers, to make
out with her foot the outlines and colours of a picture hidden under a carpet.
Other experiments showed that her knees and shoulders had a similar sensitivity.
During all these tests Vera was blindfold; and, indeed, except when blindfold 
she lacked the ability to perceive things with her skin. It was also found that
although she could perceive things with her fingers, this ability ceased the
moment her hands were wet.


#  411 How to grow old

Some old people are oppressed by the fear of death. In the young there is a
justification for this feeling. Young men who have reason to fear that they will
be killed in battle may justifiably feel bitter in the thought that they have
been cheated of the best things that life has to offer. But in an old man who
has known human joys and sorrows, and has achieved whatever work it was in him
to do, the fear of death is somewhat abject and ignoble. The best way to
overcome it -- so at least it seems to me -- is to make your interests gradually
wider and more impersonal, until bit by bit the walls of the ego recede, and
your life becomes increasingly merged in the universal life. An individual human
existence should be like a river -- small at first, narrowly contained within
its banks, and running passionately past boulders and over waterfall. Gradually
the river grows wilder, the banks recede, the waters flow more quietly, and in
the end, without any visible break, they become merged in the sea, and
painlessly lose their individual being. The man who, in old age, can see his
life in this way, will not suffer from the fear of death, since the things he
cares for will continue. And if, with the decay of vitality, weariness
increases, the thought of rest will be not unwelcome. I should wish to die while
still at work, knowing that others will carry on what I can no longer do, and
content in the thought that what was possible has been done.


#  412 Banks and their customers

When anyone opens a current account at a bank, he is lending the bank money,
repayment of which he may demand at any time, either in cash or by drawing
checks in favor of another person. Primarily, the bank-customer relationship is
that of debtor and creditor -- who is which depending on whether the customer's
account is in credit or is overdrawn. But, in addition to that basically simple
concept, the bank and its customers owe a large number of obligations to one
another. Many of these obligations can give rise to problems and complications
but a bank customer, unlike, say, a buyer of goods, can not complain that the
law is loaded against him.

The bank must obey its customer's instructions, and not those of anyone else.
When, for example, a customer first opens an account, he instructs the bank to
debit his account only in respect of checks drawn by himself. He gives the bank
specimens of his signature, and there is a very firm rule that the bank has no
right or authority to pay out a customer's money on a check on which its
customer's signature has been forged.  It makes no difference that the forgery
may have been a very skillful one: the bank must recognize its customer's
signature. For this reason there is no risk to the customer in the practice,
adopted by banks, of printing the customer's name on his checks. If this
facilitates forgery, it is the bank which will lose, not the customer.


#  419 The stuff of dreams

It is fairly clear that the sleeping period must have some function, and
because there is so much of it the function would seem to be important.
Speculations about its nature have been going on for literally thousands of
years, and one odd finding that makes the problem puzzling is that it looks very
much as if sleeping is not simply a matter of giving the body a rest. 'Rest', in
terms of muscle relaxation and so on, can be achieved by a brief period lying,
or even sitting down. The body's tissues are self-repairing and self-restoring
to a degree, and function best when more or less continuously active. In fact a
basic amount of movement occurs during sleep which is specifically concerned
with preventing muscle inactivity.

If it is not a question of resting the body, then perhaps it is the brain that
needs resting? This might be plausible hypothesis were it not for two factors.
First the electroencephalograph ( which is simply a device for recording the
electrical activity of the brain by attaching electrodes to the scalp ) shows
that while there is a change in the pattern of activity during sleep, there is
no evidence that the total amount of activity is any less. The second factor is
more interesting and more fundamental. Some years ago an American psychiatrist
named William Dement published experiments dealing with the recording of
eye-movements during sleep. He showed that the average individual's sleep cycle
is punctuated with peculiar bursts of eye-movements, some drifting and slow,
others jerky and rapid. People woken during these periods of eye-movements
generally reported that they had been dreaming. When woken at other times they
reported no dreams. If one group of people were disturbed from their
eye-movement sleep for several nights on end, and another group were disturbed
for an equal period but when they were not exhibiting eye-movements, the first
group began to show some personality disorders while the others seemed more or
less unaffected. The implications from all this were that it was not the
disturbance of sleep that mattered, but the disturbance of dreaming.


#  424 Beauty

A young man sees a sunset and, unable to understand or to express the emotion
that it rouses in him, concludes that it must the gate way to a world that lies
beyond. It is difficult for any of us in moments of intense aesthetic experience
to resist the suggestion that we are catching a glimpse of a light that shines
down to us from a different realm of existence, different and, because the
experience is intensely moving, in some way higher. And, though the gleams blind
and dazzle, yet do they convey a hint of beauty and serenity greater than we
have known or imagined. Greater too than we can describe; for language, which
was invented to convey the meanings of this world, can not readily be fitted to
the uses of another.

That all great art has this power of suggesting a world beyond is undeniable.
In some moods, Nature shares it. There is no sky in June so blue that it does
not point forward to a bluer, no sunset so beautiful that it does not waken the
vision of a greater beauty, a vision which passes before it is fully glimpsed,
and in passing leaves an indefinable longing and regret. But, if this world is
not merely a bad joke, life a vulgar flare amid the cool radiance of the stars,
and existence an empty laugh braying across the mysteries; if these intimations
of a something behind and beyond are not evil humour born of indigestion, or
whimsies sent by the devil to mock and madden us, if, in a word, beauty means
something, yet we must not seek to interpret the meaning. If we glimpse the
unutterable, it is unwise to try to utter it, nor should we seek to invest with
significance that which we can not grasp. Beauty in terms of our human meanings
is meaningless.


#  425 Non-auditory effects of noise

Many people in industry and the Services, who have practical experience of
noise, regard any investigation of this question as a waste of time; they are
not prepared even to admit the possibility that noise affects people. On the
other hand, those who dislike noise will sometimes use most inadequate evidence
to support their pleas for a quieter society. This is a pity, because noise
abatement really is a good cause, and it is likely to be discredited if it gets
to be associated with bad science.

One allegation often made is that noisy produces mental illness. A recent
article in a weekly newspaper, for instance, was headed with a striking
illustration of a lady in a state of considerable distress, with the caption
'She was yet another victim, reduced to a screaming wreck'. On turning eagerly
to the next, one learns that the lady was a typist who found the sound of office
typewriters worried her more and more until eventually she had to go into a
mental hospital. Now the snag in this sort of anecdote is of course that one can not
distinguish cause and effect. Was the noise a cause of the illness, or were
the complaints about noise simply a symptom? Another patient might equally well
complain that her neighbors were combining to slander her and persecute her, and yet one
might be cautious about believing this statement.

What is need in the case of noise is a study of large numbers of people living
under noisy conditions, to discover whether they are mentally ill more often than
other people are. Some time ago the United States Navy, for instance, examined a
very large number of men working on aircraft carriers: the study was known as
Project Anehin. It can be unpleasant to live even several miles from an
aerodrome; if you think what it must be like to share the deck of a ship with
several squadrons of jet aircraft, you will realize that a modern navy is a good
place to study noise. But neither psychiatric interviews nor objective tests
were able to show any effects upon these American sailors. This result merely
confirms earlier American and British studies: if there is any effect of noise
upon mental health, it must be so small that present methods of psychiatric
diagnosis can not find it. That does not prove that it dose not exist; but it does
mean that noise is less dangerous than, say, being brought up in an
orphanage -- which really is a mental health hazard.


#  426 The past life of the earth

It is animals and plants which lived in and near water whose remains are most
likely to be preserved, for one of the necessary conditions of preservation is
quick burial, and it is only in the seas and rivers, and sometimes lakes, where
mud and silt has been continuously deposited, that bodies and the like can be
rapidly covered over and preserved.

But even in the most favourable circumstances only a small fraction of the
creatures that die are preserved in this way before decay sets in or, even more
likely, before scavengers eat them. After all, all living creatures live by
feeding on something else, whether it be plant or animal, dead or alive, and it
is only by chance that such a fate is avoided. The remains of plants and animals
that live on land are much more rarely preserved, for there is seldom anything
to cover them over.  When you think of the innumerable birds that one sees
flying about, not to mention the equally numerous small animals like filed mice
and voles which you do not see, it is very rarely that one comes across a dead
body except, of course, on the roads. They decompose and are quickly destroyed
by the weather or eaten by some other creature.

It is almost always due to some very special circumstances that traces of land
animals survive, as by falling into inaccessible caves, or into an ice crevasse,
like the Siberian mammoths, when the whole animal is sometimes preserved, as in
a refrigerator. This is what happened to the famous Beresovka mammoth, which was
found preserved and in good condition. In his mouth were the remains of fir
trees -- the last meal that he had before he fell into the crevasse and broke
his back.  The mammoth has now been restored in the Paleontologist Museum in St.
Petersburg. Other animals were trapped in tar pits, like the elephants,
sabre-toothed cats, and numerous other creatures that are found at Rancho la
Brea, which is now just a suburb of Los Angeles. Apparently what happened was
that water collected on these tars, and the bigger animals like the elephants
ventured out onto the apparently firm surface to drink, and were promptly bogged
in the tar. And then, when they were dead, the carnivores, like the
sabre-toothed cats and the giant wolves, came out to feed and suffered exactly
the same fate.  There are also endless numbers of birds in the tar as well.
